In this movie, I will show you my top 20 keyboard shortcuts for PowerPoint. Knowing them well will not
only make you faster inside PowerPoint, it will also ease the decision making and will help you to eliminate
mental stress, especially if your deadlines are very short.
So instead of playing hide and seek in the command ribbon and trying to recall where was each command button,
just hit the keys without even thinking much about it, and get the task done quickly. To help you memorize
the shortcuts,
I divided them into three categories: shortcuts which come in handy when doing the basic formatting,
shortcuts for managing presentations, as well as shortcuts helping in the design process.
Let's start with the top shortcuts for the basic formatting.
Shortcut #1 and 2: Ctrl G and Ctrl Shift G
To group selected objects on the slide,
press Ctrl G.
To ungroup objects, including group objects, Smart Art Graphics or Enhanced Metafiles, select them
and press
Ctrl Shift G
Please keep in mind that if you have organized slide layout like here, it's actually very easy for
someone to accidentally move those shapes and text boxes.
Of course, you can prevent that.
Just select the objects you want to be part of the same column and heat Ctrl G.
It's also a great opportunity to talk briefly about PowerPoint Icon Gallery.
Actually, many of the icons inside that gallery are now fully ungroupable objects.
Let's check it out.
I go to the 'Insert' tab, choose 'Icons',
and let's search by using the tag
I'm going to type 'house', for example.
OK, now I select this icon here,
and click 'Insert'.
Now I select the object,
make it bigger by pressing Ctrl and dragging the nodes in the coroner.
Now, let's assume I would like to change the color of the roof.
Of course, it cannot be done easily because the icon is grouped.
Please keep in mind that PowerPoint icons or any other vector graphics are of the Windows
Enhanced MetaFile format (EMF)
If you want to ungroup EMF inside PowerPoint, you must press Ctrl Shift G
twice.
Remember, twice. Let's do this. I select the object, I press Ctrl Shift G once. Now, I select
'Yes',
and hit Ctrl Shift G the second time.
Now I end up with a couple of shapes and I can modify their look individually.
Shortcut #3:
Ctrl D
Ctrl D enables you to duplicate an object.
But now I will show you a magic trick which will totally change the way you design slides.
I select this rectangle here and press Ctrl D to duplicate it.
Next, I change its position without unselecting the copied shape, it's very important.
Now I press Ctrl D again.
As you can see, PowerPoint remembers the pattern and moves each new object the same distance,
and in the same direction as my last manual move.
Let's now jump to the next slide.
I would like to show you how you can use Ctrl D to build the slide
layout very quickly.
This is the typical business slide
with three header boxes and the row header on the left.
If I want to create a copy of this part here,
I need to select it,
press Ctrl G to group, Ctrl D to create a copy,
adjust the position of this group like this.
Again, my smart guides help me a lot.
And as the last step, I press Ctrl D three times.
Shortcut #4 and 5
Ctrl Shift C and Ctrl Shift V
These two shortcuts work as a format painter.
If you already know that Ctrl C copies and Ctrl V pastes, all you need to do is adding the
Shift key to memorize these shortcuts.
Let's see how they work in practice.
Select the first call out, press Ctrl Shift C.
Now, I select the second object and hit Ctrl Shift V.
The formatting of the first call out is now applied into the second one.
You might of course wonder
why this shortcut is better than the normal Format Painter available inside the 'Home' tab.
Actually, once you pick up the style, the formatting is in your memory cache all the time.
It means that you can do other things inside PowerPoint, like creating new slides or typing text,
and anytime you select a shape and press Ctrl Shift V again, you still apply the initially picked up style.
It's very convenient and it helps you to make your presentation consistent in terms of style.
Shortcut #6 and 7
Ctrl Shift <
Ctrl Shift >
What you will be constantly doing as you build your PowerPoint presentation, is changing the font sizes.
Instead of going to the dropdown list and choosing the number, you can save a bunch of time by pressing
Ctrl Shift < or
>
Let's see how it works in practice.
Here I have an organizational chart.
I would like to quickly increase the font size.
So I select the objects,
and press Ctrl Shift
>
Now, let's move on to the table below. Here, on the other hand,
the size is too big. To change that,
I place the cursor inside the table,
press Ctrl A to select the text, and hit Ctrl Shift <.
Please keep in mind that you can use these two shortcuts in Microsoft Word as well.
Shortcut #8: Ctrl 1
Microsoft Office charts have a number of moving parts like total, series name, legends, chart titles, etc.
Formatting those elements by working with the right click menu like this, might be very
time consuming.
The fastest way is selecting the item you want to format and pressing Ctrl 1 shortcut.
As you can see, the dialog box appears automatically on the right hand side of my screen,
and I am free to format whatever I want.
Also, keep in mind that you can use this dropdown list on the top of the menu in order to jump to the
various elements of your chart without having to select them with your mouse.
Generally, I really like this control one shortcut and I use it in other Microsoft Office applications
like Word and Excel.
Shortcut #9: F2
If you have an object that contains text, pressing F2 enables you to cycle between selecting the text
and selecting the object itself for moving or formatting.
To demonstrate how helpful the shortcut might be, I prepared an organizational chart.
This is a simple visualization of the company's structure.
Let's assume,
I would like to modify the text inside each rectangle by adding the name of the person occupying
each position.
If I click on the CEO, I really struggle to activate a cursor inside the shape.
What I can do instead is selecting the shape and pressing F2 shortcut, which automatically selects
the text.
Now, I press right arrow key to jump to the end of the line,
press Shift Enter to insert a soft line break, and I type the CEO name.
Great.
Let's do the same with the marketing manager. I select the shape, press F2, right arrow key, Shift Enter
and type the name.
Shortcut #10: F4
When you need to repeat your last action in PowerPoint, no matter what it is,
hit F4 keyboard shortcut.
Here I have two slides sharing the same layout.
You can see four photographs related to architecture,
and technology.
What I don't like is the fact that the image colors do not match my template style.
Therefore, I decided to make all of these photographs black and white.
So I select the first photo, picture format tab activates automatically
as you can see. I go to the 'Color',
and I choose the first option available on the list, which is Saturation 0%.
It makes my photograph black and white.
This action is now in my memory cash, and I can apply it onto any image inside my presentation.
Let's do this!
I select the second photo, hit F4, the third one, hit F4 again,
and the last one.
OK, now I can jump to the second slide and press F4 for each image.
Personally, this is one of my favorite shortcuts in PowerPoint.
I strongly encourage you to use it in your daily work as well.